He knows everything in his portfolio.
Very good. And neither can she ask anything about spy agencies.
Because I wouldn't know.
All right. Yes. Well, good afternoon, Minister.
Thank you for making your time available today to talk us through the Armed Forces
Discipline Legislation Amendment Bill.
We've already had an initial briefing and a range of discussions on that.
We'll be hearing from some public submitters after your
contribution this afternoon as well.
But I'd like to hand over to you to give us some insight around the legislation,
your thinking on that, and then I'm sure there'll be some questions too.
Great.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon, members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to this.
I also acknowledge and thank members of Defense who have prepared well
for this
appearance. I'll actually stick reasonably closely to some speaking notes.
I think it's usually more compelling to be more extemporaneous, but
I'm mindful of the need to be quite precise in my language so far as my
opening remarks go before, of course, handing over to you
for any questions you may have.
Are you comfortable for me to proceed, Mr. Chair?
Yes. Sorry. Please continue.
Yep, thanks.
So first of all, thanks for taking time to consider the bill, and the object, as
you no doubt know, is to modernize the military justice system by making it simpler
and easier to navigate. In doing so, it'll help the New Zealand Defense Force,
which I'll henceforth refer to as NZDF, to better direct its time and
resources to delivering core operational outputs while maintaining an effective,
portable, and expeditious system of discipline.
In 2019, several external reviews examined aspects of the military justice system,
including the summary trial process.
These reviews identified that parts of the system were inefficient, overly
complicated, and time-consuming, particularly for low-level
disciplinary offenses. In addition, investigatory powers were
seen to be outdated and have not kept pace with developments in technology.
Mr. Chair, I don't know if other members of the committee
have spent time on the Justice Committee such that they'd be very familiar with
these themes in the civil justice system as a whole, but I know that there
is good faith commitment across the House of Parliament to examine
those in that separate realm as well.
But I just make the obvious point that while part of the thrust of this bill is to
align, to a large extent, civil and military systems of justice,
there's also sort of a parallel work stream in which
both are seeking to become more efficient in some of the ways that I will shortly
describe.
An example of the more close alignment is that the bail
provisions will be amended to align with the Bail
Act. The use of national security information in court proceedings will apply the
framework used by civilian courts under the Security Information and Proceedings
Act, and provisions to address disruptive behavior and contempt of court are, of
course, aligned with the Contempt of Court Act.
A new search warrant framework will require judicial oversight of searches
of electronic devices and searches by NZDF
military police of areas outside a defense area.
These search powers have been designed to be consistent with the New Zealand Bill
of Rights Act 1990 and the Search and Surveillance Act.
The bill also aims to improve other aspects of the military justice system by
introducing a new minor disciplinary sanction system that offers an
alternative pathway to address low-level offending, creating additional safeguards
on the use of detention as a punishment at summary trial, transferring
responsibility for serious, complex, or sensitive offending out of the chain of
command, the military chain of command,
to the Director of Military Prosecutions, introducing new provisions to
conduct drug and alcohol testing for disciplinary purposes, and extending the right
to elect trial by court martial in all cases other than minor
disciplinary offenses.
Mr. Chair, I flag now that the remarks I'm about to make
relate to a new proposal in terms of the government's decision-making,
and I do understand that you've had the benefit of a briefing previously from Naval
Commander Rowe, I believe today. So it might
not be totally novel to you, but nevertheless, I'll express it as best I
can and look forward to any questions on that or any other aspect, of course.
So noting that the policy of the bill is to make the military justice system easier
to navigate and to administer to better enable command to focus
on operational outputs. I'd also like the bill to clarify which
orders issued by the Chief of Defense Force, CDF, are
legislative and which are not. Defense Force orders issued by
CDF are a vital instrument for command and control of the armed forces.
All Defense Force orders are currently deemed to be secondary legislation.
Despite this, the vast majority of Defense Force orders are administrative
rather than legislative in nature, setting policy on matters as varied
as conditions of service for members of the armed forces, intelligence and
security, health and safety, operations and planning, healthcare, and ceremonial
matters. The bill could clarify that Defense Force orders are those orders
that are administrative rather than legislative
in nature, and creating defense rules as
a new category of orders for those that have legislative effect.
Orders issued by CDF that impact on the operation of the military justice system
would, of course, be legislative statement.
Excuse me, would of course be legislative and would have the status of new defense
rules.
These could include, for example, the orders currently provided for in the bill to
designate offenses that may be dealt with under the minor disciplinary sanctions
system and other orders already provided for in the AFDA.
As an important safeguard, I propose that the new defense rules would be subject to
the scrutiny of the Regulations Review Committee in the same way as other secondary
legislation.
In conclusion, Mr. Chair, the amendments in the bill are designed to be compliant
with the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act, and it's essential, of course, that the
military justice system is fit for purpose.
These things are not mutually exclusive in my view, and therefore, I conclude that
I believe that reforms will make the system more efficient, streamlined, and fair.
So to you, Mr. Chair, obviously happy to take any questions or commentary that you
and all the committee may have.
Excellent. Thank you very much, Minister. Appreciate that.
And sorry, I should have started by formally acknowledging this
settingYour new role, congratulations on being the new Minister of
Defence. Of course, we've talked about that outside of the setting, but in
the setting, we welcome you along.
Obviously picking up a piece of legislation partway through has
been, I'm sure, a good opportunity for you to upskill in some new
areas of-
All my own work, Mr. Chair
That's good. Exactly.
Thank you.
Thanks for the clarity too, on the additional proposal that we heard briefly about
this morning too, around the rules versus DFO's
legislative versus admin. But I'm sure there'll be questioning from
committees. Venetia Wald.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And just to add my congratulations as well, Minister, on you
and your responsibilities.
Just so confirming, I'm trying to get my head around the distinction
between what would continue to be legislative and therefore disallowable
versus what would-
Yeah
... as you said, go to the scrutiny of the regs review, but not be
disallowable.
Yeah.
The minor sanctions would go to regs review but not be disallowable.
That's correct?
I think that's correct, because they would be...
I'm just not sure exactly what I said.
They would con- be considered rules-
Yeah. That's right
... under the regime.
It's a new category for this thing known as defense rules going forward, yes.
Understand. My concern would be that those could be legislative
in nature in terms of where we draw the line of what counts as a minor
sanction.
Yeah.
Understanding that the regime is intended to minimize
the
pipeline getting busy in terms of summary hearings.
A considerable number of those offenses would now be moved
into a non-legislative space. And so just a general
concern around that. I have two others, if it's useful just to
raise them now in the list.
If you're happy, Mr. Chair, for me to take them all together, and then-
Yeah, sure
... come back to each.
So on limitations, the other matter of concern is that
for,
on serious offenses in particular, that there isn't a limitation
period on that, which is unusual in terms of
the LDAT rules. And I wonder if you turned your mind to
considering whether to just extend the limitation period that would
apply to similar offenses in the civil
space. And the third was, I understand that there's
an existing Henry VIII power within the current
legislation, which allows a modification of
how primary legislation applies.
Was wondering whether you'd considered just amending the primary legislation
so it allows for those more specific circumstances where unusual
circumstances have arisen in the past and a modification has been
required so that we don't have that Henry VIII provision in the
current leg.
Do you mind if I clarify with your proposal about removing the Henry VIII power,
is it that we would not need that,
notwithstanding that there could be future novel requirements?
That we could put in the primary legislation the nature of
instances where there were potentially joint operations or
things that in the past, I understand it's quite rare.
But given we now have the experience of understanding when those modifications
could happen to avoid having to have a Henry VIII provision.
Interesting proposal. I'm not sure that my predecessor or the team more
generally had turned their mind to that. If you'd allow me, Mr.
Chair, just to check if there's any guidance and say, well, in fact, are you happy
with Commander Robertson joining me at the table?
Whether or not he's happy to do that, it's another matter, but-
... here he is. Do you have any reflections on the Henry VIII power?
In general terms, and I shouldn't say this is a fellow former member of Regs Review
Committee, but one doesn't normally give them up when one has them.
But anything more robust legally than that?
It might be something that we can take away for consideration for inclusion in the
departmental report. It's not something that we've considered as part of the
preparation of the bill so far.
So if that would be helpful for the committee, we can certainly take that away and-
Sure
... come back to you on that.
And I think I might take your other comments, perhaps almost in the nature of
rhetorical questions around suggestions for those
safeguards, as I characterize them together, or at least the
proposal to extend the limitation.
It might be something that we could give some thought to and include in
departmental report. And then your first point about where to draw the line.
Mm-hmm.
I'm not sure exactly where that line is drawn and how one exactly
characterizes that which is administrative in nature.
I suppose it's possible to conceive of examples that might neatly fit in one
category or the other, but, I think we'll have to make sure that we
give serious thought to ensuring that we're in the appropriate category.
Anything further you'd like to add?
So we're working very closely with PCO on where that line is
drawn, and that might be something we can hopefully put in the departmental report
as well.
Thank you.
Very good.
All right.
Appreciate your time, Minister. Thank you very much for coming in this afternoon.
Thank you.
And we will look forward to the scrutiny of this bill as that progresses.
Thank you very much, Chair. Thank you, Committee, appreciate that. Thanks.
Look forward to working
with you.
Thanks.
All right.
Excuse me.
Cheers.
Okay, we are hearing next from Max Marshall.
Good
afternoon, Mr. Marshall.
Good afternoon. I am-
Welcome along to the committee. You've seen how it works, and I'm sure are familiar
with how it works. We have five minutes sit down for today.
We have received your written submissions.
We'll hand over to you now, and then if you wish to allow time for questions,
we'll include that in the five minutes as well. Thank you.
Sure. Okay. Cheers.
Hi there. Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak.
I would like to address a section of the bill as it relates to improving
ability to deal with sensitive or complicated offenses.
What I'm saying may be difficult to hear, but
it is necessary that I say the important thing out
loudIf you asked me to think about sexual
violence or sexual assault in the armed forces,
what was the first thing that came into my head when
I thought about the sex? If I thought about the sex of the
victim or victims,
I would say that the victim is female.
How interesting. I'm curious too,
but I want to ask instead, what is driving the violence?
I'm worried that we are labeling the symptom rather than diagnosing the
cause.
The question underneath.
Not surprisingly, the forces are not alone in grappling
with this problem. It is a problem with society at large.
One of the fundamental problems in our society
is that we think women are special and men are bad.
So in the West, some groups in the past have promoted the idea of
patriarchy and the idea of dominance by men.
Conversely, when women are the boss, this means success,
and men are always the problem.
However, today, with women getting the vote and entering the workforce, we still
have men harming women.
Why? What is driving this?
The question is: why do men lose it?
Do they feel that the work being done to improve equality
has not been a success or having
led to outcomes that they now feel disadvantaged?
In this thought, I want you to avoid making it worse.
So given we've done our best to address wrongs, have we
made some things worse?
We've made men to believe that women have
become privileged and that they are now seen as inferior.
So they've gone and decided to treat them like dirt.
Has this happened?
If the answer is yes, how did it happen?
If we push men in 2026 and blame them, and we
appear to reward women and punish them, are
we inadvertently making it worse by doing what we believe is right?
Protecting women is a good thing I want to keep, but
how to feed it without producing an unintended outcome.
We have been building more prisons in the belief that we can fix crime,
and yet we have more crime.
Something tells me that a belief is wrong if my
solution is not working.
This part, we tell everyone that they are equal.
We are, in fact, maybe paradoxically producing the
very thing we are trying to prevent.
Instead of arguing for greater transparency for offenders
being caught and punished, I want to ask: what is the cause?
What is the cause? The solution is to have deeper
thought and less shallow analysis.
All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Marshall. We have time for one question. Mr.
Costley.
Thank you. I just want to be really clear that if anyone is offending in this way,
particularly in your example against women, it is not the fault of a woman, and
I'm not looking for a way to justify that behavior.
I don't think that's ever okay, and I want to be very clear about that.
You also made the point that
putting people in prison maybe doesn't solve it.
But
how would you respond then to the fact that since this government's been in for two
and a half years, toughened up laws, brought back three strikes, gone really hard
on serious and violent offending.
Last year alone, there were 49,000 less victims than the year before.
Yes, there are more people in prison, but consequence has seen far less
victimization. Isn't that a good thing?
Yeah, it is.
I
guess if you looked at a
male and a sexual offender, where did he
lose it? And that's what we're not asking here.
We can go and say, "Well, we have more success because
look at us, we've fixed the force. We've put all these people
aside." But that doesn't
necessarily mean success.
We've...
Okay. Thank you.
All right. Thank you very much for your perspectives. Chair.
Okay. Next up, we have Graeme Edgeler.
Good afternoon, Mr. Edgeler.
Thank you for having me.
Thank you for joining us. Thank you for your time making your written submission
and indeed coming in today. Our members have all had a chance to read that.
So we welcome your comments on that.
We have 10 minutes set down for that today, and I'm sure there'll be some
questions.
Thank you. It's good. I think I'm finally in front of the
right select committee. Mr. Costley has mentioned three strikes, and I
think the point I make about three strikes in my submission is something
I've mentioned definitely once and I think twice in various submissions for three
strikes to the Justice Committee about, oh, have you considered whether people
convicted of strike offenses at court-martial should be covered by three strikes?
And the response I got at that time and the advice was,
"That's
not a matter for the Ministry of Justice to deal with.
That's a matter for someone else." And so I think I have the right committee to
look at that. My general view is I oppose three
strikes. The current version of three strikes you have is actually a
pretty good one. If you're going to have one that has the protections in
place that you want it to have, that's a matter for someone else.
But if you are to have one, then I think it is important that it does apply to
everyone who gets that level of conviction.
Mm-hmm.
And certainly, there have been rape
prosecutions at court-martial. There have certainly been a number of rape
conv... Oh, sorry, not rape.
Indecent assault convictions at court-martial as well.
And in none of those cases-If three strikes had applied, would
a first strike have happened? And so if that person
leaves the military at that point, goes on to the
civilian population, and gets charged again, they would not have a strike history.
And if you are to have a strike law,
it should apply, I think, where wherever the conviction is, whether it's in a civil
court or a military court. And so,
I think that should be something that should be looked at seriously as,
if we're going to have this, then it should apply consistently.
I have a few other points, sort of related points about sort of criminal conviction
history,
and things like that, possibly slightly less important.
But, again, that is something that I've noti-- has come up a few times in the
past. There's just a news article about someone, and someone wasn't aware that this
person had been convicted of this, because if you go to the Ministry of Justice and
ask for a conviction history, if someone has a conviction for even something
as serious as rape in the military, and I'm not sure there has been, but there
certainly have been in decent assault, that will not show up on a Ministry of
Justice conviction history.
Mm-hmm.
If someone's doing a full sort of review of someone, do police
assessment, security review, then they'll get a copy of their military service
history or something like that, and they'll find out.
But if you're a private organization where what you do, your due
diligence in advance is, "Can we have a copy of your conviction history?" You will
not get a conviction in the military. And most of the time that will make sense.
Someone was late to parade, that type of thing.
The military justice system
is, to an extent, what would be in any other circumstance, the large
uses of it are employment matters. This person was late today.
In the military, that can result in a trial.
Somewhere else, it would just be a disciplinary meeting with your manager or
something like that. And so it makes sense.
But when you're talking about particularly the Section 74-1 offenses, that is, this
is an offense against New Zealand's criminal law that applies to everyone,
then I think probably the same rule should apply.
The other matter I'll speak to now briefly is name suppression.
I think
if you are going to have name suppression that can be ordered by non-judges, then
it makes sense that there is the possibility for an appeal.
The thing I would suggest for you is,
get some advice on how often... There have been name suppressions by
disciplinary officers over the last few years, one particularly famous one.
I don't know if there have been any others.
I suspect they're not needed all that often.
But if there aren't that many, and my suspicion is there aren't,
then this is probably something that you could just have judges involved in.
The types of things that, name suppression will sometimes be appropriate.
Often you won't need it in the military, because someone can say, "Don't say
anything," and military people are used to following orders.
And so you might not need a suppression order, and you're like, if the information
doesn't get out, then it doesn't matter who knows about it.
But for the particularly serious ones, if there is a case like the case we know of
from a few years back, and there might be other ones that I, as a sort of member of
the public, don't know about.
Just get some advice on, there have been or there's been the suggestion
that suppression power already exists, and it has been exercised.
My suspicion is it hasn't been exercised very much, and so the few instances where
it is needed, you probably could just go to a judge and get the order, and that
would sort of, the types of things that you want in place when
someone is ordering journalists not to publish something.
Someone who is trained at balancing that will be a
judge of court-martial and not necessarily someone's commanding officer who will
generally have some legal advice but will not be legally trained.
Happy to take questions on that or any other aspect of my submission.
Yeah, excellent. Hey, thanks so much for that.
Really appreciate that insight into a range of different areas.
Mm-hmm.
And I think you raised some really valid concerns there.
Just on that last one, I'm interested in your assessment and obviously, you
note that they have a good understanding of the need for suppression, but they
don't necessarily have a good understanding of the military reason around why it
might be important. Do you see a potential issue with that?
Uh-
You're proposing it goes to judges.
Well, it would be judges of court-martial.
And so they are people who do issue military suppression orders at the
moment. And it would be someone has to make an application.
We need a suppression order in this case for military reasons.
And so I wouldn't suggest other judges.
You've got district court judges.
I think all or almost all, perhaps the senior judge of court martial is
district court judges who are judges specifically assigned to be judges of
court martial.
They will be issuing suppression orders now in these cases once it
gets to that stage. But occasionally you need a suppression order
in an earlier stage in the proceeding.
So the famous, the well-known
case, I don't think we ever found out the gentleman's name, the officer who was
charged with espionage. That certainly went to a court-martial,
but there was a suppression order from his disciplinary officer, his commanding
officer, at an earlier stage of that proceeding, and it would just be if you do
need this sort of order because there are public matters, and we do not
want it in the news media, that my suggestion would
be, okay, if you want that sort of order, go to the judge slightly
earlier in the process than you do.
So at the moment you have the preliminary hearings and the preliminary matters are
dealt with by the disciplinary officer, and then at some point, "Oh, this is
serious. I'm going to send it to a court martial." And if you're in that sort of
case, and I suspect there aren't many where a suppression order is actually needed-
Mm
... go to that judge of court martial slightly earlier in the process.
Yep. All right. Thank you. Tiano Tuiana.
Yeah. Thank you for that. It's really enlightening.
I was wondering, you talked about name suppression and suppression ,
and I'm not sure whether
that's just the only specific example, but I'm wondering, are there other things
that we should also be aware of beyond name
suppression, or was that just the-
I think in general it works. The law isn't fundamentally changing
as far as name suppression goes once you get to court martial.
So once you have
military judge effectively, once you get that, that process I
think works well, and it works exactly the same as it does in the district court or
the high court for whatever level of
process you're dealing with.
It's just
when you're at the earlier stages of a serious matter or at
the minor disciplinary sanction type stage where
I'm not sure it's going to be needed all that often, but if it is, then
the people who make sort of the experience of knowing the military side and the
need for it, but also knowing the Bill of Rights side and how
newspapers operate and what's a justified limit or not, and okay, well, we
can't have this information, but maybe you could publish these three
things. And sort of you will of,
if you're dealing with sort of criminal trials,
journalists or their lawyers will stand up and say, "We want to be able to publish
something,"
which is how we get to know the prominent entertainer and all those sorts of
things, and that's something where previously, quite often a person will be told,
"You can't
mention this person's employment," but then journalists want to be able to say
something, and judges have that back and forth.
Okay, well, the name has to be secret, and you can't say where this person's from
because it's a small town of 100 people or something like that.
But judges,
every judge of a court martial is a district court judge who has a jury trial
warrant, and so they are very used to dealing with these sorts of things.
And I think it would be well within-- I suspect it doesn't happen very often, and
so it's something that they could be asked to deal with in the few cases it comes
into.
Okay.
Very good. Any final questions?
All right, thank you very much for coming in this morning.
Thanks very much.
We appreciate your insights and your time. Thank you.
All right. That brings us to an end of the public submissions on this
bill.